.TH RGXG_NET_CIDR_STRING 3 "Aug 02, 2016" "rgxg 0.1.1" "librgxg manual"
.SH NAME
rgxg_net_cidr_string, rgxg_net_cidr_ipv4, rgxg_net_cidr_ipv6 - create regex that matches all addresses of the given CIDR block

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <rgxg/net.h>

.BI "int rgxg_net_cidr_string (const char *" cidr ", char **" endptr ", char *" regex ,
.ti +5n
.BI "rgxg_options_t " options );

.BI "int rgxg_net_cidr_ipv4 (const rgxg_ipv4_t *" address ", int " prefix ", char *" regex ,
.ti +5n
.BI "rgxg_options_t " options );
.BI "int rgxg_net_cidr_ipv6 (const rgxg_ipv6_t *" address ", int " prefix ", char *" regex ,
.ti +5n
.BI "rgxg_options_t " options );
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR  rgxg_net_cidr_string ()
generates the (extended) regular expression that matches all addresses of the CIDR block given as string in
.I cidr
(e.g. "192.168.0.0/24" or "2001:db8:aaaa::/64").
.I cidr
must be valid and not NULL.

If
.I endptr
is not NULL,
.BR  rgxg_net_cidr_string ()
stores on success the address of the first character which is not part of the CIDR block in
.IR *endptr .
If there is no error and
.I **endptr
is '\\0', then the entire string has been parsed. The
.I *endptr
values in case of an error are described in the
.B ERRORS
section below.

.BR rgxg_net_cidr_ipv4 "() and " rgxg_net_cidr_ipv6 "()"
generate the (extended) regular expression that matches all addresses of the CIDR block specified by
.I address
and
.IR prefix " (network identifier),"
which must be between 0 and 32
.RB "(" rgxg_net_cidr_ipv4 "())"
respectively 128
.RB "(" rgxg_net_cidr_ipv6 "())"
inclusive.
.I address
must be valid and not NULL.

The
.I rgxg_ipv4_t
and
.I rgxg_ipv6_t
structures which are the types of
.I address
are defined in
.IR <rgxg/net.h> .

.in +4n
.nf
typedef struct {
    uint8_t octet[4];
} rgxg_ipv4_t;

typedef struct {
    uint16_t hextet[8];
} rgxg_ipv6_t;
.fi
.in

The
.BR n -th
element of the
.IR octet / hextet
array stores the
.BR "(n+1)" -th
octet/hextet of the IPv4 respectively IPv6 address (i.e. for instance the first octet
.RB "'" 192 "'"
in
.RB "'" 192.168.0.0 "'"
is stored in
.IR octet[0] ")."

The generated regular expression is written to the character string
.IR regex ,
including the terminating null byte ('\\0'), unless
.B RGXG_NONULLBYTE
is set. If
.I regex
is NULL the return value is the number of characters (excluding the terminating null byte) that would have been written in case
.I regex
has been initialized. Note that the functions assume an arbitrarily long
.I regex
string, callers must
.B ensure
that the given string is large enough to not overflow the actual space.

.I options
is either zero, or the
.RB bitwise- or
of one or more of the following macros:

Options marked as
.RB "'"IPv6 " only'"
can be used with
.BR rgxg_net_cidr_string ()
(when parsing IPv6 CIDR blocks) and with
.BR rgxg_net_cidr_ipv6 ().

.TP
.BR RGXG_NOUPPERCASE " (" IPv6 " only)"
The generated regular expression only matches IPv6 addresses with lower case
letters. By default both lower and upper case letters are matched.
.TP
.BR RGXG_NOLOWERCASE " (" IPv6 " only)"
The generated regular expression only matches IPv6 addresses with upper case
letters. By default both lower and upper case letters are matched.
.TP
.BR RGXG_NOZEROCOMPRESSION " (" IPv6 " only)"
The generated regular expression does not match IPv6 addresses with zero
compression (second form of text representation of IPv6 addresses mentioned in
section 2.2 of
.BR  "RFC 4291" ).
.TP
.BR RGXG_NOMIXEDNOTATION " (" IPv6 " only)"
The generated regular expression does not match IPv6 addresses in mixed
notation (third form of text representation of IPv6 addresses mentioned in
section 2.2 of
.BR  "RFC 4291" ).
.TP
.BR RGXG_NOOUTERPARENS " (" IPv6 " only)"
Omit the outer parenthesis, if any, of the regular expression.

.TP
.B RGXG_NONULLBYTE
Do not add the terminating null byte ('\\0') to the
.I regex
string.

.PP
Note that
.BR RGXG_NOUPPERCASE " and " RGXG_NOLOWERCASE
are mutual exclusive options.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"

Upon successful return, these functions return the number of characters (excluding the terminating null byte) written to
.IR regex .

If an error occurs, a (negative) error code is returned (see
.B ERRORS
section).

.SH "ERRORS"
The following errors can be returned:
.TP
.B RGXG_ERROR_PREFIX
Invalid network identifier (e.g. the prefix is lesser than 0 or greater than 32
(IPv4) respectively 128 (IPv6)).

.BR rgxg_net_cidr_string ():
If
.I endptr
is not NULL,
.I *endptr
points to the first character of the invalid prefix.
.TP
.BR RGXG_ERROR_ARG2BIG " (" rgxg_net_cidr_string "() only)"
At least one octet/hextet is too large.

.BR rgxg_net_cidr_string ():
If
.I endptr
is not NULL,
.I *endptr
points to the first digit of the too large octet/hextet.
.TP
.BR RGXG_ERROR_SYNTAX " (" rgxg_net_cidr_string "() only)"
Syntax error in
.I cidr
string.
If
.I endptr
is not NULL,
.I *endptr
points to the character that causes the syntax error.

.TP
.BR RGXG_ERROR_MUTEXOPTIONS " (" rgxg_net_cidr_string "()/" rgxg_net_cidr_ipv6 "() only)"
Two mutual exclusive options were specified.

.SH AVAILABILITY
These functions are available since rgxg 0.1.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR regex (7),
.BR rgxg_number_greaterequal (3),
.BR rgxg_number_range (3).

.SH AUTHOR
Hannes von Haugwitz <hannes@vonhaugwitz.com>
